>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 19: THE TRUMP
TRANSITION-- THE PRESIDENT-ELECT
SEEKS COUNSEL FROM THE PREVIOUS
REPUBLICAN PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE,
MITT ROMNEY; AND IN OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WAR IN IRAQ--
ETHNIC KURDS IN THE FIGHT TO
RETAKE MOSUL ARE ALSO FIGHTING
FOR THEIR OWN AUTONOMY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
CONTINUES TO WORK TOWARDS
FILLING KEY POSITIONS IN HIS
INCOMING ADMINISTRATION.
AT THE TRUMP NATIONAL GOLF CLUB
IN NEW JERSEY, ONE OF 17 HE
OWNS, MR. TRUMP AND VICE
PRESIDENT-ELECT MIKE PENCE MET
ONE OF TRUMP'S FIERCEST CRITICS
DURING THE CAMPAIGN: MITT
ROMNEY, THE 2012 REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE.
ROMNEY IS NOW SAID TO BE A
CANDIDATE FOR SECRETARY OF
STATE.
>> VERY THOROUGH AND IN-DEPTH
DISCUSSION IN THE TIME WE HAD,
AND I APPRECIATE THE CHANCE TO
SPEAK WITH THE PRESIDENT-ELECT
AND LOOK FORWARD TO THE COMING
ADMINISTRATION.
>> Stewart: FOLLOWING HIS
AGREEMENT YESTERDAY TO PAY $25
MILLION TO ABOUT 7,000 FORMER
TRUMP UNIVERSITY STUDENTS WHO
HAD SUED HIM FOR FRAUD, MR.
TRUMP WENT TO TWITTER TODAY TO
RESPOND.
HE WROTE:
THE SETTLEMENT CAME TEN DAYS
BEFORE A SAN DIEGO COURT WAS
SCHEDULED TO HEAR A CLASS ACTION
LAWSUIT OVER THE CURRICULUM THAT
PROMISED THE SECRETS OF REAL
ESTATE SUCCESS.
ALSO TODAY, MR. TRUMP CALLED ON
THE CAST OF THE BROADWAY MUSICAL
"HAMILTON" TO APOLOGIZE TO MIKE
PENCE, WHO ATTENDED THE TONY
AWARD-WINNING SHOW LAST NIGHT.
AFTER THE CURTAIN CALL, THE
ACTOR WHO PLAYS THOMAS
JEFFERSON'S VICE PRESIDENT,
AARON BURR, ADDRESSED MR. PENCE,
SAYING THE MULTIRACIAL CAST IS
"ALARMED AND ANXIOUS YOUR NEW
ADMINISTRATION WILL NOT PROTECT
US, OUR PLANET, OUR CHILDREN,
OUR PARENTS OR DEFEND AND UPHOLD
OUR INALIENABLE RIGHTS."
HE THEN ASKED MR. PENCE TO WORK
ON BEHALF OF "ALL OF US."
PENCE WAS ALREADY EXITING THE
THEATER AS THE REMARKS OCCURRED.
WHILE THE PRESIDENT-ELECT HOLDS
MEETINGS TO FILL TOP JOBS IN HIS
ADMINISTRATION, PRESIDENT BARACK
OBAMA IS WINDING UP THE LAST
MAJOR FOREIGN TRIP OF HIS
PRESIDENCY.
AFTER VISITING EUROPE EARLIER
THIS WEEK, MR. OBAMA WAS IN PERU
TODAY FOR THE ANNUAL ASIAN-
PACIFIC SUMMIT.
HE MET TODAY WITH PERU'S
PRESIDENT, WHO WARNED LAST NIGHT
THAT MR. TRUMP'S OPPOSITION TO
TRADE DEALS SUCH AS THE TRANS-
PACIFIC PARTNERSHIP COULD
THREATEN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY.
PRESIDENT OBAMA MET TODAY WITH
THE LEADERS OF THE 11 OTHER
COUNTRIES THAT JOINED THE U.S.
IN REACHING THE T.P.P. DEAL.
ALSO ON MR. OBAMA'S SCHEDULE: A
TOWN HALL MEETING WITH YOUNG
PEOPLE AT A UNIVERSITY IN LIMA
AND A MEETING WITH CHINA'S
PRESIDENT, XI JINPING.
DURING HIS CAMPAIGN, CANDIDATE
TRUMP SAID HE OPPOSED NAFTA, THE
NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE
AGREEMENT THAT WENT INTO EFFECT
IN 1994.
IT EASED TRADE AMONG THE U.S.,
CANADA AND MEXICO.
CRITICS, LIKE MR. TRUMP, BLAME
NAFTA FOR CAUSING U.S. COMPANIES
TO MOVE JOBS PARTICULARLY TO
MEXICO, WHERE LABOR IS CHEAPER
AND REGULATIONS LESS STRINGENT.
BUT WHAT ABOUT CANADA?
BOTH MEXICO AND CANADA SEND MOST
OF THEIR EXPORTS TO THE U.S.
TO DISCUSS THE TRADE ISSUE
FURTHER, I AM JOINED NOW FROM
WASHINGTON BY ALEXANDER PANETTA,
THE WASHINGTON CORRESPONDENT FOR
"THE CANADIAN PRESS."
ALEXANDER, BOTH CANADIAN AND
MEXICAN LEADERS REACHED OUT TO
THE INCOMING TRUMP
ADMINISTRATION, SIGNALING A
WILLINGNESS TO TALK ABOUT NAFTA.
WHY DO THIS BEFORE MR. TRUMP
EVEN TAKES OFFICE?
>> WELL, I SUSPECT PART OF THE--
PART OF THE RATIONALE WAS TO
REMOVE SOME OF THE DRAMA FROM
THE CONVERSATION.
THERE HAVE BEEN ADJUSTMENTS MADE
TO NAFTA OVER THE YEARS,
INCLUDING WHEN BILL CLINTON TOOK
OFFICE, AND AFTERWARDS IN 2001,
2004.
THE RULES OF ORIGIN FOR A FEW
PRODUCTS WERE CHANGED, INCLUDING
FOR FEATHERS, FOR ORE, FOR
COCOA, CRANBERRY JUICE.
SO THE QUESTION NOW IS HOW MUCH
HE WANTS TO CHANGE IT.
YOU'LL NOTE THAT HE WASN'T
EXACTLY VERY EXPLICIT DURING THE
CAMPAIGN ABOUT THE CHANGES HE
WOULD BE SEEKING.
SO DOES PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP
INTEND TO DO A DRASTIC OVERHAUL,
OR SOMETHING ALONG THE LINES OF
WHAT'S ALREADY OCCURRED SEVERAL
TIMES?
>> Stewart: CANADIAN PRIME
MINISTER JUSTIN TRUDEAU HAS BEEN
PROACTIVE ABOUT THIS.
HE SPOKE ABOUT IT ON A NEWS
CONFERENCE ON WEDNESDAY.
AND THEN, SOME OF HIS CRITICS
SAID, "WAIT, YOU JUST WEAKENED
OUR NEGOTIATING POSITION."
HAS HE, AND WHAT DOES CANADA
HAVE TO LOSE SHOULD NAFTA CHANGE
OR BE ERADICATED?
>> I THINK ONE OF THE BEST
METAPHORS FOR THE CANADA/U.S.
RELATIONSHIP CAME FROM THE
PRIME MINISTER'S FATHER.
PIERRE TRUDEAU, DURING A STATE
DINNER HERE IN WASHINGTON,
DESCRIBED THE CANADA-U.S.
RELATIONSHIP AS BASICALLY A
MOUSE SLEEPING NEXT TO AN
ELEPHANT, THAT NO MATTER HOW
EVEN TEMPERED THE ELEPHANT IS,
EVERY TWITCH IS FELT BY THE
PARTNER.
AND LATELY THE ELEPHANT'S BEEN
TWITCHING A LOT.
76% OF OUR EXPORTS COME TO THE
UNITED STATES.
ABOUT A QUARTER OF OUR JOBS ARE
DEPENDENT IN SOME WAY ON TRADE
WITH THE UNITED STATES.
IT WOULD BE DEVASTATING TO OUR
ECONOMY.
>> Stewart: GLOBALIZATION HAS
CHANGED THE CONVERSATION IN SO
MANY DIFFERENT COUNTRIES, AND
IT'S CHANGED THE POLITICAL TENOR
IN SO MANY DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.
WHAT ABOUT IN CANADA?
>> I THINK A LOT OF CANADIANS
WOULD LIKE TO PAT THEMSELVES ON
THE BACK AND SAY WE ARE SO OPEN
TO GLOBALIZATION, WE'RE
WELCOMING REFUGEES AND TRADE AND
FOREIGNERS AND EVERYTHING IS
GOING SWIMMINGLY.
BUT THE TRUTH IS, THERE ARE
DIFFERENT FACTORS AT PLAY, ONE
BEING BASICALLY THAT WE SHARE A
BORDER WITH YOU, WITH A VERY
DEVELOPED COUNTRY; THAT THE
IMMIGRATION HASN'T CHANGED
NECESSARILY THE TENOR OF OUR
LABOR MARKET, AS OPPOSED TO THE
UNITED STATES, WHERE A LOT OF
IMMIGRATION HAS BASICALLY DRIVEN
DOWN SOME LOW-COST WAGES.
AND, SO THAT, YOU KNOW, CREATES
SOME SOCIAL TENSION.
THAT DOESN'T EXIST IN CANADA
VERY MUCH.
OUR IMMIGRATION SYSTEM ALSO
OPERATES ON A POINT SYSTEM.
BASICALLY, WE CAN PICK AND
CHOOSE ENGINEERS, DOCTORS,
BASICALLY IMMIGRANTS WHO COME
AND FILL CERTAIN SLOTS IN THE
ECONOMY.
THAT ALSO CHANGES THE FEELINGS
ABOUT TRADE AND GLOBALIZATION.
SO, ESSENTIALLY, YOU HAVE THE
CONDITIONS THERE FOR A COUNTRY
THAT'S VERY HAPPY WITH THE
GLOBALIZED WORLD AND ECONOMY.
SO YOU DON'T HEAR THIS KIND OF
COMPLAINING ABOUT TRADE IN A
NATIONAL ELECTION.
>> Stewart: ALEXANDER PANETTA
FROM THE "THE CANADIAN PRESS,"
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: FUNERAL SERVICES
WERE HELD TODAY IN WASHINGTON,
D.C., FOR OUR COLLEAGUE AND
FRIEND, NEWSHOUR ANCHOR GWEN
IFILL, WHO LOST HER BATTLE WITH
CANCER EARLIER THIS WEEK.
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA
ATTENDED, AND FORMER ATTORNEY
GENERAL ERIC HOLDER SPOKE.
THROUGHOUT TONIGHT'S BROADCAST,
WE'LL REMEMBER GWEN AND HER
REMARKABLE CAREER WITH EXCERPTS
OF A FEW OF HER MEMORABLE
INTERVIEWS.
WE BEGIN WITH A CONVERSATION SHE
HAD WITH FORMER EDUCATION
SECRETARY ARNE DUNCAN FOLLOWING
THE MASS SHOOTING AT SANDY HOOK
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN CONNECTICUT
IN 2012.
IT WAS PART OF A PBS SPECIAL
GWEN ANCHORED CALLED "AFTER
NEWTOWN."
>> Ifill: THE GOAL IS SIMPLE,
MR. SECRETARY, BUT THE SOLUTION
IS NUANCED, AND WE DON'T DO
COMPLICATED WELL, GENERALLY.
>> IF WE CAN'T SUMMON THE
COURAGE AND THE ABILITY TO BE
NUANCED, THE ABILITY TO DEAL
WITH COMPLEX STUFF, TO DEAL WITH
IT FOR THE LONG HAUL, I ACTUALLY
HAVE A LOT OF CONFIDENCE IN OUR
COUNTRY AT THE END OF THE DAY.
AND I THINK-- I THINK GIVEN THIS
HORRENDOUS TRAGEDY, I'M-- I'M
OPTIMISTIC.
I CAN'T GUARANTEE YOU, BUT I'M
OPTIMISTIC THAT WE CAN GET OUR
COUNTRY TO A MUCH, MUCH BETTER
PLACE.
>> Ifill: YOU SAID YOU HAVE TWO
CHILDREN.
HOW OLD?
>> MY DAUGHTER IS 11 AND MY SON
IS EIGHT.
>> Ifill: DID THEY ASK YOU ABOUT
THIS?
>> OH, WE'VE TALKED ABOUT IT
EXTENSIVELY, AND WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT, YOU KNOW, GUNS AND GUN
VIOLENCE.
>> Ifill: SO, WHAT DO YOU SAY TO
THEM?
>> I SAY THAT WE ALL HAVE TO
WORK TOGETHER TO MAKE THINGS
BETTER FOR YOU AND YOUR FRIENDS,
AND YOU DESERVE BETTER.
>> Stewart: THE NORTHERN PLAINS
STATES ARE DIGGING OUT FROM THE
SEASON'S FIRST MAJOR SNOW STORM.
THE NATIONAL WEATHER SERVICE
SAYS MORE THAN A FOOT OF SNOW
WHIPPED BY HIGH WINDS FELL IN
PARTS OF MINNESOTA, CREATING
BLIZZARD CONDITIONS.
STATE POLICE REPORTED 340
ACCIDENTS, ONE FATAL, AND
ADVISED MOTORISTS TO STAY HOME.
BLINDING WHITEOUT CONDITIONS
WERE REPORTED ON ROADS IN SOUTH
DAKOTA, AND UP TO SIX INCHES OF
SNOW FELL IN NEBRASKA.
FACEBOOK C.E.O. MARK ZUCKERBERG
IS REVEALING HIS EVOLVING PLAN
TO MITIGATE FAKE NEWS POSTED ON
THE SOCIAL NETWORK.
TODAY, ON HIS FACEBOOK PAGE,
ZUCKERBERG WROTE, "WE TAKE
MISINFORMATION SERIOUSLY," AND
AGAIN QUOTING, "WE KNOW PEOPLE
WANT ACCURATE INFORMATION."
ZUCKERBERG ASSERTS THE
PERCENTAGE OF FALSE STORIES ON
FACEBOOK IS "RELATIVELY SMALL"
BUT SAYS THE COMPANY IS WORKING
ON NEW TOOLS TO DETECT
MISINFORMATION AND HELP USERS
REPORT IT.
FACEBOOK HAS RECEIVED COMPLAINTS
THAT FAKE NEWS STORIES MAY HAVE
AFFECTED THE U.S. PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION.
THE COMPANY HAS ALREADY SAID IT
WON'T DISPLAY ADS OR SITES
RUNNING INFORMATION THAT IS
"ILLEGAL, MISLEADING OR
DECEPTIVE."
WHAT INFLUENCE DID FAKE NEWS
POSTED ON FACEBOOK HAVE ON THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION?
FOR MORE, VISIT OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Ifill: YOU KNOW, SOME
PEOPLE WOULD SAY IT'S ABOUT
POLITICS, BUT I WONDER IF IT'S
NOT ALSO ABOUT YOUR PRESENCE,
YOUR VERY EXISTENCE ON THE
COURT, AND THE WAY THAT YOU
WRITE AND THE WAY THAT YOU
SOMETIMES TAKE ON YOUR
COLLEAGUES.
>> I WOULD LIKE TO THINK SO, BUT
I CERTAINLY WAS GIVEN A
TREMENDOUS BOOST INTO THE PUBLIC
ARENA BY THE NOTORIOUS R.B.G.
WHEN I WAS ASKED ABOUT IT, I
SAID, WELL, IT'S EXACTLY RIGHT
BECAUSE NOTORIOUS B.I.G. AND I
HAD SOMETHING IN COMMON-- WE
WERE BOTH BORN AND BRED IN
BROOKLYN, NEW YORK.
>> Ifill: ( LAUGHS )
YOU EVER CONSIDERED BEING A
RAPPER?
( LAUGHTER )
>> I DON'T THINK I HAVE THAT
TALENT.
>> Ifill: WELL, NEITHER DO I.
>> Stewart: IRAQI MILITARY
COMMANDERS SAID TODAY THEY ARE
FACING STIFF RESISTANCE FROM
ISLAMIC STATE-- OR ISIS--
FIGHTERS IN EASTERN MOSUL.
THE OFFENSIVE TO RETAKE THE CITY
OCCUPIED BY ISIS FOR TWO YEARS
ENTERS ITS SECOND MONTH.
IN THE BATTLE FOR MOSUL, ETHNIC
KURDS ARE FIGHTING SIDE BY SIDE
WITH IRAQI FORCES AGAINST A
COMMON ENEMY: ISIS.
AND MANY KURDS BELIEVE THIS
FIGHT MAY BRING THEM CLOSER TO A
GOAL MANY SHARE: INDEPENDENCE.
THE KURDS ARE AN ETHNIC GROUP
SPREAD ACROSS FIVE COUNTRIES--
IRAQ, IRAN, TURKEY, SYRIA AND
ARMENIA-- A WIDE AREA THEY
CONSIDER TO BE THEIR ANCESTRAL
HOMELAND.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
IN THE FIRST OF TWO REPORTS FROM
INSIDE IRAQ, NEWSHOUR WEEKEND
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY HAS MORE ON
THE ASPIRATIONS OF THE IRAQI
KURDS.
>> Reporter: THIS IS ERBIL, THE
CAPITAL OF IRAQI KURDISTAN, AN
OASIS OF STABILITY IN THE MIDDLE
EAST.
IT'S A SEMI-AUTONOMOUS REGION IN
THE NORTHERN PART OF IRAQ.
EVEN AFTER THE 2003 U.S.
INVASION TO OVERTHROW SADDAM
HUSSEIN, WHEN THE REST OF IRAQ
WAS IN TURMOIL FOR YEARS, IRAQI
KURDISTAN REMAINED SAFE AND
PROSPEROUS.
TODAY, LIFE HERE SEEMS PEACEFUL.
BUT WAR IS LESS THAN 50 MILES
AWAY ON THE ROAD TO MOSUL,
IRAQ'S SECOND LARGEST CITY,
WHICH ISIS TOOK OVER MORE THAN
TWO YEARS AGO.
JUST INSIDE MOSUL'S CITY LIMITS,
IN A NEIGHBORHOOD CALLED GOGALI,
IRAQI FORCES ARE LEADING THE
FIGHT TO TAKE THE CITY BACK, AND
KURDISH MILITARY UNITS KNOWN AS
THE PESHMERGA ARE BACKING THEM
UP.
THE IRAQIS ACKNOWLEDGE THEY
COULD NOT ATTEMPT THIS FIGHT
WITHOUT THE HELP OF THE KURDS.
BARAQ MOKDAD IS WITH IRAQI
SPECIAL FORCES.
HIS UNIT HAD SET UP A BLOCKADE
TO KEEP ISIS, KNOWN IN ARABIC AS
DAESH, FROM BREAKING THROUGH THE
FRONT LINE.
SO, THIS MORNING, HE'S SAYING
DAESH SENT A HUMVEE PACKED WITH
EXPLOSIVES THAT BLEW UP RIGHT
HERE ON THE OTHER SIDE OF THIS
BLOCKADE.
AND HIS SOLDIERS WITH A 50-
CALIBER MACHINE GUN, THEY WERE
ABLE TO STOP HIM THERE.
YOU CAN HEAR THOSE 50-CALIBER
MACHINE GUNS RIGHT NOW IN THE
BACKGROUND.
YOU CAN ACTUALLY SEE THE REMAINS
OF ONE ISIS FIGHTER WHO WAS
INVOLVED IN THAT ATTEMPTED
BREACH OF THIS BLOCKADE RIGHT
HERE.
HE'S CLEARLY BEEN COVERED UP BY
THE DEBRIS.
AS WE EXPLORED THE FRONT LINE,
WE FOUND MORE EVIDENCE OF ISIS'
BATTLE STRATEGY: USING TRUCKS
REINFORCED WITH ARMOR PLATING AS
BATTERING RAMS; AND IN THIS
ABANDONED WAREHOUSE, MASS
PRODUCING IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES, I.E.D.s.
THE EVIDENCE WAS STREWN AROUND
THE FLOOR.
IT'S A BRUTAL FIGHT THE KURDS
ARE ESPECIALLY ANXIOUS TO WIN,
FIGHTING NOT ONLY TO STOP ISIS
BUT FOR GREATER LEGITIMACY ON
THE WORLD STAGE IN THEIR
STRUGGLE TOWARD ESTABLISHING
GREATER INDEPENDENCE FROM IRAQ.
>> SO, I REALLY THINK THIS IS A
HISTORICAL MOMENT FOR US AS
KURDS.
>> Reporter: NILUFER KOC IS CO-
CHAIR OF THE KURDISTAN NATIONAL
CONGRESS, A GROUP REPRESENTING
THE OFTEN COMPETING INTERESTS OF
KURDS THROUGHOUT THE MIDDLE
EAST.
SHE SAYS THERE'S A GOOD REASON
WHY IRAQI KURDS STOOD UP TO ISIS
FROM THE BEGINNING.
>> THE PATRIOTISM TO DEFEND THE
COUNTRY WAS THE MAIN REASON, AND
I THINK THAT THE GLOBAL POWERS
HAVE SEEN THE STRENGTH OF KURDS
AND THE CONTINUITY OF KURDS
DEFENDING, INSISTING ON THE
DEFENSE OF THEIR COUNTRY.
THAT'S WHY KURDS BECAME PARTNERS
OF THE INTERNATIONAL COALITION.
>> Reporter: THE KURDS HAVE MADE
SO MANY GAINS DURING THE LAST
SEVERAL WEEKS IN THE ASSAULT ON
MOSUL, THE IRAQI PRIME MINISTER,
HAIDER AL-ABADI, HAS PUBLICLY
ASKED THE LEADER OF THE IRAQI
KURDS, MASOUD BARZANI, NOT TO
TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE CHAOTIC
SITUATION IN MOSUL TO PURSUE
KURDISH TERRITORIAL AMBITIONS.
AL-ABADI SAYS THE AIM OF THE
BATTLE FOR MOSUL SHOULD ONLY BE
FREEING THE CITIZENS FROM ISIS.
THE UNITED STATES MILITARY
AGREES.
COLONEL BRETT SYLVIA IS
COMMANDER OF THE SECOND BRIGADE
OF THE U.S. ARMY'S 101st
AIRBORNE DIVISION, FROM FORT
CAMPBELL, KENTUCKY.
HE SAYS IT'S A BALANCING ACT
BETWEEN FORMER RIVALS, BUT IT'S
WORKING.
>> YOU'VE GOT THE PESHMERGA
CAMP, YOU GOT THE KURDISH FLAG
FLYING THERE.
AND WHEN YOU LOOK JUST ON THE
OTHER SIDE OF THAT WALL, THERE
YOU GOT THE IRAQI CAMP WITH THE
IRAQIS FLYING THEIR FLAGS.
AND SO, REALLY, I GUESS IT COULD
KIND OF SYMBOLIC OF WHAT WE'RE
DOING HERE.
WE'RE ADVISING EACH ONE OF THESE
GUYS, AND THEY ARE WORKING
TOGETHER.
WE'RE WORKING WITH THEM IN ORDER
TO ABLE TO BRING THIS WHOLE
THING TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: HIS TROOPS ARE IN
NORTHERN IRAQ TO PROVIDE ADVICE
AND ASSISTANCE TO THE KURDISH
PESHMERGA AND IRAQI ARMY DURING
THE ASSAULT ON MOSUL.
THEY'RE PART OF THE 5,000
AMERICAN TROOPS STILL DEPLOYED
IN IRAQ.
>> THE PESHMERGA HAVE PLAYED A
VERY HELPFUL ROLE IN THIS MOSUL
COUNTERATTACK.
THEY HAD FORMALLY A KURDISH
DEFENSIVE LINE THAT THEY MANNED,
THAT THEY MAINTAINED, THAT THEY
DEFENDED.
AND IN COOPERATION WITH IRAQI
SECURITY FORCES, THEY DID PUSH
FORWARD FROM THAT LINE IN ORDER
TO BE ABLE TO SUPPORT THE
OFFENSIVE, ALL IN AGREEMENT WITH
THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT.
AND IT IS MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
ONCE THE OFFENSIVE IS OVER, THEN
THOSE KURDISH SECURITY FORCES
WILL MOVE BACK TO THAT ORIGINAL
DEFENSIVE LINE.
>> Reporter: THAT'S THE DEAL
THAT THEY MADE?
>> YES.
>> Reporter: BUT SOME PESHMERGA
ON THE FRONT LINES, LIKE COLONEL
ARSHAD GALALY, SEEM TO THINK THE
KURDS HAVE A RIGHT TO EXPAND
THEIR TERRITORY AND THAT KURDISH
INDEPENDENCE SHOULD BE THEIR
EVENTUAL GOAL.
SO, WHAT HAPPENS NEXT AFTER ISIS
IS EXPELLED FROM MOSUL?
>> (translated): WE WANT OUR
INDEPENDENCE.
>> Reporter: DO YOU GET THAT
MILITARILY, POLITICALLY?
HOW DO YOU GET INDEPENDENCE?
>> (translated): WE'VE BEEN
FIGHTING, MAKING GREAT
SACRIFICES FOR A CENTURY.
WE'VE ALREADY EARNED IT.
>> Reporter: IT'S A SENSITIVE
QUESTION.
HE INSISTS KURDISTAN SHOULD BE
INDEPENDENT, BUT HE WON'T SAY
HOW.
BUT OTHER KURDS ARE MORE CANDID,
LIKE NAJMALDIN KARIM, THE
GOVERNOR OF THE OIL-RICH
PROVINCE OF KIRKUK.
OFFICIALLY, IT'S OUTSIDE THE
BORDERS OF KURDISTAN.
BUT TWO YEARS AGO, WHEN THE
IRAQI ARMY FLED AS ISIS
APPROACHED, THE KURDS CAME TO
THE CITY'S DEFENSE, AND THEY'VE
BEEN IN CHARGE EVER SINCE.
>> THE KURDS HAVE PROVEN THEY
COULD GOVERN THEMSELVES.
WE HAVE PROVEN THAT WE CAN
DEFEND OURSELVES.
WE HAVE EVERY RIGHT LIKE ANY
OTHER NATION TO BE INDEPENDENT.
WE HAVE TO WORK ON THIS WITH THE
GOVERNMENT IN BAGHDAD AND TALK
TO THEM OPENLY.
WE WANT TO BE GOOD NEIGHBORS.
WE NEED EACH OTHER.
WE HAVE TO TALK TO THE
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES-- TURKEY,
IRAN, EVEN SYRIA WHEN THERE IS A
DECENT GOVERNMENT THERE.
I THINK THE TIME IS OVERDUE.
>> Reporter: BUT THE TIME FOR
WHAT?
FOR A STATE?
FOR A KURDISH STATE?
>> YES, FOR AN INDEPENDENT
KURDISTAN.
>> Reporter: IF THAT DAY COMES,
THIS 12-FOOT-TALL CONCRETE WALL
IN THE KIRKUK PROVINCE COULD
BECOME THE NEW BORDER.
THE PESHMERGA BUILT IT TO KEEP
ISIS OUT.
IT EXTENDS 30 MILES BEYOND THE
OFFICIAL BORDERS OF KURDISTAN,
BECOMING A DE FACTO DIVIDING
LINE BETWEEN THEIR GROWING
TERRITORY AND THE REST OF IRAQ.
MEANWHILE, KURDISTAN IS PLAYING
ANOTHER IMPORTANT ROLE IN THE
ONGOING CONFLICT, HOSTING MORE
THAN A MILLION REFUGEES, MOST OF
THEM ARAB IRAQIS LIKE HUSSEIN
FATHEL AND HIS FAMILY.
>> (translated): MY HOMETOWN
COULD WIND UP IN KURDISTAN ONCE
THE BORDERS ARE REDRAWN.
BUT IT MAKES NO DIFFERENCE, SO
LONG AS I CAN RAISE MY FAMILY
AND SHEEP IN PEACE.
>> Reporter: AS THE MOSUL
OFFENSIVE GRINDS ON, KURDISTAN
IS BRACING FOR UP TO ONE MILLION
ADDITIONAL REFUGEES.
THAT'S STRAINING RESOURCES IN A
REGION GIVING ITS ALL IN THE
FIGHT AGAINST ISIS.
>> WE HAVE TO FEED THEM, WE HAVE
TO SHELTER THEM, WE HAVE TO
PROTECT THEM.
>> Reporter: THE U.S. HAS
STEPPED IN RECENTLY TO HELP FUND
THE KURDISH MILITARY AND OTHER
CRISIS MEASURES RELATED TO THE
BATTLE WITH ISIS.
SO, WHO ARE THESE OTHER PEOPLE?
WHILE SHE'S HOPEFUL ABOUT THE
FUTURE, KURDISTAN NATIONAL
CONGRESS CO-CHAIR NILUFER KOC IS
WARNING HER FELLOW COUNTRYMEN
NOT TO GO TOO FAR WHEN IT COMES
TO INDEPENDENCE.
IRAQI KURDS, SHE SAYS, NEED TO
TREAD VERY CAREFULLY.
>> POLITICALLY, MORE AND MORE
PEOPLE ARE UNDERSTANDING THAT
INSISTING ON A NATION STATE OF
KURDISTAN WOULD BE CATASTROPHIC
FOR THE REGION.
SO, WHAT CAN BE DONE?
THIS IS A GOOD TIME TO GET MORE
RIGHTS THROUGH DIALOGUE WITH
BAGHDAD.
THE KURDISH DREAM OF BEING MORE
FREE IS POSSIBLE.
>> Stewart: ON TOMORROW'S
PROGRAM, IN OUR SECOND REPORT
FROM IRAQ, WE'LL LOOK AT THE
CHALLENGES FACING IRAQI
CHRISTIANS, AND I'LL SPEAK WITH
THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR IN IRAQ
ABOUT THE CONTINUING U.S. ROLE
THERE.
>> Stewart: SINCE THE SIEGE OF
ALEPPO BEGAN TWO MONTHS AGO,
HOSPITALS HAVE BEEN FREQUENT
TARGETS OF SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
BOMBS.
MOST, IF NOT ALL, OF THE
HOSPITALS IN THE ANTI-
GOVERNMENT, REBEL-HELD EASTERN
SIDE OF WHAT WAS SYRIA'S MOST
POPULOUS CITY ARE OUT OF SERVICE
THIS WEEKEND DUE TO HEAVY
SHELLING IN RECENT DAYS.
AS ITN'S FATIMA MANJI REPORTS,
CHILDREN ARE QUITE OFTEN THE
VICTIMS OF THESE ATTACKS AND THE
FOCUS OF FRANTIC RESCUE
ATTEMPTS.
A WARNING: SOME VIEWERS MAY FIND
SOME OF THESE IMAGES DISTURBING.
>> Reporter: JUST NORTH OF
ALEPPO, IN AN OPPOSITION-HELD
AREA, A TEAM FROM THE WHITE
HELMETS DRILL INTO RUBBLE.
A SUDDEN MOVEMENT OF A BLANKET
AND A CHILD'S FACE EMERGES.
AFTER FOUR DAYS OF BOMBARDMENT,
ONCE AGAIN THIS HAS BECOME THE
NORM.
SHE DOESN'T MAKE A SOUND, A
LITTLE GIRL WRAPPED UP IN HER
BEDDING AND THE WRECKAGE OF WAR.
ONCE SHE'S BEEN PULLED OUT, IT'S
A RUSH TO GET HER TO HOSPITAL,
EXCEPT EVEN THERE SHE MIGHT NOT
BE SAFE.
ACTIVISTS SAY SEVERAL HOSPITALS
HAVE BEEN HIT BY AIR STRIKES.
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT DENIES
TARGETING MEDICAL FACILITIES.
AT THE ALEPPO CHILDREN'S
HOSPITAL, ANOTHER VICTIM, THREE-
YEAR-OLD AYESHA, AWAITS HELP.
IT'S BELIEVED HER MOTHER AND
FATHER HAVE DISAPPEARED UNDER
THE SAME RUBBLE THAT STAINS HER
FACE, A BARREL BOMB DESTROYING
YET ANOTHER FAMILY.
HER BROTHER ALI CARTS AROUND
THEIR BABY SISTER.
HE'S STRUGGLING AND APPEARS TO
BE CRYING OUT FOR SOME SORT OF
HELP.
BUT THAT'S IN SHORT SUPPLY IN
ALEPPO.
THE U.N. PLANNED CONVOYS WITH
AID FOR A MILLION SYRIANS IN
BESIEGED AREAS AND HAS A
HUMANITARIAN PLAN TO GET THE
SICK AND WOUNDED OUT OF THE
CITY.
BUT SO FAR, NEITHER RUSSIA NOR
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT NOR
OPPOSITION GROUPS HAVE GIVEN
FINAL APPROVAL.
ON SUNDAY, RESIDENTS OF ALEPPO
RECEIVED TEXT MESSAGES FROM THE
SYRIAN ARMY TELLING THEM TO
LEAVE AREAS HELD BY THE
OPPOSITION.
UP TO 250,000 PEOPLE ARE STILL
LIVING ON THE EASTERN SIDE.
AFTER WEEKS OF RELATIVE CALM,
THE LAST FEW DAYS HAVE SEEN
REPEATED BOMBARDMENT, AND AT
LEAST 65 PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED.
IN THE DISTRICT OF BAB AN
NARRYAB, THIS MAN POINTS OUT A
DESTROYED NEIGHBORHOOD.
>> (translated): WHO DO YOU
THINK IS LIVING HERE?
THERE ARE NO TERRORISTS.
IT'S ALL CHILDREN.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE STILL
SMILES IN THE STREETS, EVEN WHEN
PLAYTIME HAS TO BE COMBINED WITH
THE TASK OF CARRYING HOME
ESSENTIAL SUPPLIES.
BUT EVEN MORE COMMON IN THIS
CITY, THE SIGHT AND SOUND OF A
CHILD CRYING.
THE IMAGE OF A MOTHER HOPING,
PRAYING, BESEECHING SOME GREATER
POWER TO SAVE THEM FROM THIS
HELL.
>> Stewart: SHARON JONES, A
POWERFUL SOUL AND BLUES SINGER
WHO ACHIEVED FAME IN MID-LIFE
AND RETURNED TO TOURING THIS
YEAR AFTER FIGHTING CANCER, HAS
DIED.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND'S CHRISTOPHER
BOOKER HAS MORE.
>>  I'VE BEEN LATE...
>> Reporter: OUT IN FRONT WAS
HER VOICE-- A MASTER'S CLASS IN
SOUL, RHYTHM AND BLUES AND FUNK.
BORN IN GEORGIA, RAISED IN
BROOKLYN AND THE BAPTIST CHURCH,
SHE WAS PART ARETHA FRANKLIN,
PART JAMES BROWN, AND ALL SHARON
JONES.
>> I NEVER TOOK VOCAL LESSONS,
JUST PRACTICING AND I GUESS
BUILDING UP MY... MY LUNGS TO BE
A SIGNER.
>>  SOMETHING TOLD ME INSIDE
>> Reporter: BUT IT WAS A VOICE,
IF NOT FOR HER WILL AND
DETERMINATION, THAT WAS NEARLY
OVERLOOKED.
JONES SANG IN WEDDING BANDS BUT
SPENT YEARS MAKING A LIVING AS
AN ARMORED GUARD FOR WELLS FARGO
AND A CORRECTIONS OFFICER AT
RIKERS ISLAND.
BUT IN 1996, AT THE AGE OF 40,
SHE MET A BASS PLAYER NAMED GABE
ROTH WHO WAS FORMING A NEW
RECORD LABEL, DAPTONE.
FROM THAT MEETING, SHARON JONES
AND THE DAP KINGS WOULD RECORD
SIX ALBUMS...
>>  100 DAYS, 100 NIGHTS...
>> Reporter: ...CELEBRATING AND
REINVENTING A SOUND THOUGHT LOST
TO THE DIGITAL WORLD.
SHE RECEIVED GRAMMY NOMINATIONS
AND INFLUENCED SINGERS LIKE AMY
WINEHOUSE AND ADELE.
IN 2013, SHE BEGAN HER FIGHT
AGAINST PANCREATIC CANCER...
>>  SO MANY TIMES THERE WAS A
MAN...
>> Reporter: ...RETURNING TO THE
STAGE THE FOLLOWING YEAR AFTER
HER TREATMENT.
SHARON JONES WAS 60 YEARS OLD.
>>  OH, NO, NO, NO...
>> Ifill: TELL ME ABOUT "A
LITTLE BIT OF ME."
>> "A LITTLE BIT OF ME" IS ONE
OF THE SONGS THAT I PLAY JUST ON
MY ACOUSTIC GUITAR, WHICH IS
FUNNY BECAUSE A LOT OF THE NEW
SONGS I PLAY ON ELECTRIC GUITAR.
BUT THAT SONG IS KIND OF LIKE AN
OLDER SONG OF MINE.
IT'S A REAL COMFORTABLE SHOE
THAT I PLAY.
AND I HAVE BACKGROUND SINGERS
FOR THE FIRST TIME.
>>  NAH, NAH, NAH, NAH, NAH
>> Ifill: YOU HAVE AN OPENING
FOR A BACKUP SINGER?
>> COME ON!
>> Ifill: I'M JUST SAYING I
COULD TO IT.
IT WOULD BE A DREAM.
>> NOW, THE GIRLS WEAR LITTLE
SHORT SKIRTS.
>> Ifill: OKAY, NEVER MIND.
IT'S NOT GOING TO HAPPEN.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, TWO
NEPHEWS OF VENEZUELA'S FIRST
LADY FACE LONG SENTENCES IN
AMERICAN PRISON.
PROSECUTORS SAY THE NEPHEWS OF
CELIA FLORES, THE WIFE OF
EMBATTLED VENEZUELAN PRESIDENT
NICHOLAS MADURO, CONSPIRED TO
SMUGGLE ALMOST A TON OF COCAINE
THROUGH HONDURAS TO THE UNITED
STATES.
THE SCHEME: TO MAKE MILLIONS
SELLING THE COCAINE AND HELP
KEEP THEIR FAMILY IN POWER.
A JURY IN MANHATTAN FEDERAL
COURT CONVICTED THE PAIR
YESTERDAY, AND THEY'LL BE
SENTENCED IN MARCH.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.